[Music]
I told you at the beginning of the
class
that I started working on this
material partly because I was interested
in
why people were so inclined to
to go to any links to protect their
belief systems I wanted to understand
and I knew that those were systems of
value right that that a belief system is
something that enables you to ascribe
value to things so that so that you can
act in the world towards things and away
from things roughly
speaking
and I've already made a case to you
that belief systems regulate people's o
emotions but
not not as a consequence of decreasing
their death anxiety or anything like
that or even directly decreasing their
their threat sensitivity or uncertainty
but more specifically by helping them
Orient themselves in the world so that
what they do matches what they want in
the social environment and it's an
important set of distinctions because
the emotional control that belief
systems allow is mediated by success in
the social environment that's the
crucial thing it's not it's not
directly it's not as if you're holding a
belief system and that's directly
inhibiting somehow your emotional
responsivity it's more that you share
you have a motive orienting yourself in
the world so that other people can
understand what you're up to so that you
can cooperate and compete with them
without conflict and the fact that you
can do that without conflict and and
maybe even with cooperation that's what
regulates your emotion so it's not only
the fact of the belief belief system
it's the fact that it's shared with
everyone
else and
so people are willing to defend their
belief systems because they're defending
the territorial
structure that enables them to
make sense of the world and then to act
out making sense of the world with
everyone else around
them now then the question
arises what if two different groups of
people have different belief systems
what do you do in a situation like that
and one answer
is you capitulate another answer is that
you fight another answer might be that
you come to some consensus about how the
difference between those different
belief systems might be mediated so that
you can inhabit the same territory
without subordination or without
conflict but if you're going to come
together in an
agreement you can't do that simply by
abandoning the belief system because the
belief system is what orients you in the
world and so the negotiation is very
tricky and because of that it often ends
up in subordination or conflict
another question that might
arise out of that Rat's Nest of
questions is if you have belief system a
and you have belief system B and they're
in
conflict is there any principles that
you can use or any guidelines you can
use to take the belief systems apart to
un to try to understand what might be of
central value in either of them or both
so that if you do bring them together or
even if one supersedes the other that
there's some evidence that they're
predicated on principles that are
actually viable and of course that
brings up the question of what
constitutes viable
principles and I got interested in that
more particular question because when
the Cold War was
raging there were two ideological
systems set up in the world roughly
speaking there were of course more but
we can simplify it for the sake of
argument down to two and one was
predicated on the communitarian
principles that were put forward by Marx
and the other
was a consequence of you know the I
would say Western individualistic free
market capitalist democracies roughly
speaking and then you might ask yourself
were those only was that only a
difference of
opinion right because that's the central
question if it's just a difference of
opinion if what's underneath it is
arbitrary then a it doesn't matter which
system wins roughly
speaking
B there's no right and wrong in the
discussion right it's that that would be
something that would be more akin to a
post-modern claim it's just group a puts
forward their claims to power and Group
B puts for their claims to power and
they're both equally valid and well have
ADD fundamentally because there's no way
of of solving the problem but it struck
me that that I didn't think that we
should leap to that conclusion so
rapidly and so I started to
investigate I think I started to
investigate the
substructure of Western thought not so
much communist thought because I thought
of Communism as an interloper on the
scene it was a system that wasn't
devised and formalized until the late
1900s late 1800s and I didn't see it as
part of what you might describe as
organic development there's no mythology
so to speak at the basis of of the
Communist perspective and one of the
things that's very interesting is that
although those ideas were roundly
defeated Ed by the end of the 20th
century they're making a comeback so
rapidly that it's almost unbelievable
you know I got a an email from a medical
student yesterday at the University of
Toronto and now they're the courses that
they have to take the mandatory these
are social justice courses include
modules on equity and Equity is equality
of outcome they're pushing people are
having the equality of outcome notion
pushed on them in mandatory training in
universities everywhere again and Equity
isn't equality of opportunity it's
equality of outcome you know that was
the central dictum of the Communist
States in the 20th century it's like
what the hell how how did we get back to
that again already so and the idea being
is if there isn't absolute equality of
outcome within an organization that the
thing is corrupt and needs to be
restructured from the bottom up and then
the question of course is who decides
that outcomes are equal by what means
and with what groups cuz you can you can
produce an infinite number of groups of
people with
equally validly in some sense and you're
never going to get equality of outcome
across the infinite number of ways that
you can parse up Society into groups
it's not even technically possible
unless everyone has nothing so
anyways these are obviously very
powerful ideas and the mere fact that
they killed 100 million people already
or more in the 20th century wasn't
enough to put them to
rest anyway so back to the main
theme is is there something this is the
main question is there something is
there a set of ideas that Western
Civilization is predicated on that are
more than just bloody opinion that's the
question because if there
isn't well then what do you what do you
do about that it's arbitrary you're just
holding it for no reason whatsoever it
could be a different system there's no
reason to stick with it all of those
things like it takes the it takes the
core out of it well that was n's claim
right he said you take the core
metaphysical presupposition out from
underneath Western Civilization or any
civilization for that matter and the
whole thing loosens shens shakes and
crumbles well for nature the
metaphysical presupposition was
God well and then the question of course
what even does that mean
and on one hand it means I suppose
adherence to a dogmatic of beliefs but
then you might ask yourself well is
there something else that it means it
means at least the hypothesis of some
Transcendent value it means at least
that so you know n announced the death
of God and so one of the consequences of
that dovi was working on exactly the
same set of ideas and in crime and
punishment in particular which is a book
like it's a necessary book that's the
thing is there's a number of books that
were written in the last 120 years that
you really have to read and crime and
punishment is one of them and I think
the gulag archipelago is another and
probably Beyond Good and Evil is another
but you know dovi and nii were writing
in parallel it's remarkable how much
they're their lives intertwined and N
knew more about dovi than than is
generally known there's been some recent
scholarship indicating that but in dov's
book Crime and Punishment he has a his
main character uh
raskolnikov decides that he's going to
commit a murder and he has very good
justification for the murder and dovi is
very good at this he he puts his
characters into very very difficult
moral situations and gives them full
justification for pursuing the the
uh for pursuing the pathway they're
pursuing and so
raskolnikov he's broke and starving he
wants to go to law school his sister's
about to prostitute herself rough
roughly speaking by marrying a guy that
that hates her that she hates and that
and he has contempt for her at least
acts in that manner he's trying to
rescue his mother as well who's also in
dire Financial Straits he he he goes to
a pawn broker to pawn his meager
position so that he can continue to
scrape by and she has this niece I
believe it's her niece that's not very
bright who she basically treats as as a
slave and is horrible to and and so the
car the the the pawn broker has this
money raskolnikov is in dire need he
thinks look I'll just kill her because
why the hell not I'll take her money
she's not doing any good with it anyways
I'll free her niece who's just Ling as a
slave she's got all these other people
tangled up in her pawn broker schemes
all that'll happen is the world will be
a better place and the only thing that's
holding back is conventional moral
cowardice and you know dovi has his
character in crime and punishment go
through days hours hours and days and
weeks of intense imagination about this
rationalization about this trying to
justify himself placing him outside
placing himself outside the law so that
he can perpetrate this act and telling
himself with all the best nihilistic
arguments that the only possible thing
that could be holding him back is an an
arbitrary sense of indoctrinated
morality and so doeski explores that he
does commit the murder and then of
course all hell breaks loose because
things don't necessarily turn out the
way that you want he gets away with it
however well he gets away with it
technically because no one knows he did
it but he doesn't get away with it in
relationship to his own
conscience and so that the rest of the
book explores that well dovi I believe
it was in crime and punishment although
he makes the same point in many of his
books he makes a very fundamental point
and this is the kind of point that that
I think that people who haven't
investigated these matters down this
particularly L particular literary and
philosophical pathway never grapple with
dovi said
straightforwardly if there's no God so
if there's no higher value let's say if
there's no Transcendent value then you
can do whatever you want and that's the
question that he's investigating and you
see this is why I have such frustration
say with people like Sam Harris the sort
of radical atheist because they seem to
think that once human beings abandon
their their grounding in the
Transcendent that the the plausible Way
Forward is with a kind of purist
rationality that automatically
attributes to other people equivalent
value it's like I just don't understand
that they believe that that's the
rational pathway what the hell is
irrational about me getting exactly what
I want from every one of you whenever I
want it at every possible second why is
that irrational and how possibly is that
more irrational than us cooperating so
we can both have a good time of it I
don't understand that I mean it's as if
the the psychopathic tendency is
irrational there's nothing irrational
about it it's pure naked self-interest
how is that irrational I don't
understand that where where's the
pathway from rationality to to an
egalitarian virtue why the hell not
every man for himself and the devil take
the h most it's a perfectly coherent
philosophy and it's actually one that
you can Institute in the world with a
fair bit of material success if you want
to do it so I don't see to me I think
that that the universe that people like
Dawkins and
Harris inhabit is so intensely
conditioned by mythological
presuppositions that they take for
granted the the ethic that emerges out
of that as if it's just a given a r
given and this of course precisely
nich's observation as well as Dov that's
nich's observation you don't get it the
ethic that you think is normative is a
consequence of its of its of its nesting
inside this tremendously lengthy history
much of which was expressed in
mythological formulation you wipe that
out you don't get to keep all the
presuppositions and just assume that
they're rationally axiomatic they're the
rational to make a rational argument you
have to start with an in initial
proposition well the proposition that
underlies Western culture is that
there's a Transcendent morality now you
could say that's a Transcendent morality
instantiated in the figure of God that's
fine you could even call that a
personification of the morality if if
you want to if you if you don't want to
move into a metaphysical space I'm not
arguing for the existence of God I'm
arguing that the ethic that drives our
culture is predic at on the idea of God
and that you can't just take that idea
away and expect the thing to remain
intact midair without any foundational
support now you don't have to buy that
but if you're interested in the idea
then you can read nche because that's
what he was trying to sort out and it
wasn't only n who came to that
conclusion it was many people have come
to that conclusion but I think the two
who've outlined it most spectacularly
were n and doeski and N is an
unbelievably um influential philosopher
you know I don't think there was anyone
that was more
influential during the entire course of
the 20th century accepting a very very
tiny handful of other people accepting
the scientists we won't bother with
their with their discussion you could
put Marx in that category you could put
Freud in that category partly but after
that the list starts to get a lot
thinner you know so maybe there's 10
people up in that level and doeski of
course I think I mean if if you ever if
anybody ever prepares a list of the top
10 greatest literary figures in the
world he would be in the top 10 list you
know I think he's perhaps second to
Shakespeare and maybe above Shakespeare
in my estimation so these aren't trivial
people we're talking about and they
weren't dealing with trivial
issues well so then the question might
be what's at the bottom of the idea of a
Transcendent value and I want to wanted
to approach
that staying out of the metaphysical
domain as much as possible because you
can claim anything you want from a
metaphysical perspective and that's a
big problem and so people will say well
why come up with the hypothesis of God
for example God could be anything
there's a satire uh the Flying Spaghetti
Monster right is a classic satirical
representation of a deity that the
atheist types use to buttress their
arguments and fair enough you know as a
satirical idea it's pretty damn funny
but there's things about this that
aren't the least bit amusing and the
thing that's not amusing is well what if
anything is our culture predicated on
okay so what happened well n and doeski
put this forth this set of
propositions and out of dov's line of
thinking to some degree grew Solja niten
soja niton documented the absolute
horrors of equity predicated Soviet
Society you know and we don't teach we
don't learn about that right this I
don't understand is that what happened
in the 20th century on the radical left
end of the spectrum is not well
documented students don't learn about it
why the hell is that we learn about
World War II we learn about what
happened in the Holocaust and fair
enough we absolutely should but nobody
knows it's a mystery to everyone when
when I talk about what happened in the
Soviet Union and that's absolutely
appalling and that's to say nothing
about what happened in China which was
equally
horrible
the system didn't work it was predicated
on the wrong values unless you think
that that sort of thing means worked you
know because you you have to Define that
as well but it collapsed under its own
weight after it killed tens of millions
of people that doesn't really and still
it's not like Russia has recovered it
doesn't seem to me like that's a very
good definition of
worked now whatever we're doing in the
west seems to work for all of its flaws
and the question is are we just
deceiving ourselves is it just arbitrary
power politics and opinion or is there
something at the bottom of
it so when soja niton wrote the gulag
archipelago he believed that the
Russians would have to return to
Orthodox Christianity to find their
pathway forward and that's of course has
made him into a reactionary in the eyes
of many of his critics but that is
perhaps what is happening in Russia
although it's very difficult to tell
because Putin also seems to be using his
affiliation with the Orthodox Christian
Church as as means to consolidate power
so the situation in Russia is unclear
but a religious revival if that's
happening in Russia and perhaps it isn't
but if it is happening is something that
unfolds over decades and even centuries
so it's not an easy thing to evaluate
when it first starts to
happen but Soulja niton drew the same
conclusions that doeski did
fundamentally not not in exactly the
same way but very very close he he
believed as far as I could tell that
unless people were willing to adhere to
some sort of
weigh the hell out there in the
stratosphere and just when you think
you've understood what he was talking
about you can be bloody well sure that
you didn't but it does seem to me and he
was running out of time he died young
you know and he was trying to solve this
problem in a rush I would say and he
hypothesized that people would have to
become Supermen over men roughly
speaking in order to deal with the death
of God and that idea sort of branched
off into Nazi propaganda because that's
in some sense what the Nazis were trying
to do with their promotion of the of the
perfect Aryan you know now it's a Mis
it's a misappropriation of n in my
estimation and it was partly because his
sister who is a perverse creature um uh
uh what would you say doctored his work
in such a way so that it was more easily
appropriated by the Nazis but there is
some danger in what he said too because
you the question is well if you're going
to transform yourself into the into The
Giver of values what stops you from
inflating yourself into something like a
demigod and just pronouncing ing what
the values are going to be so that's a
problem you know you're going to replace
tradition with
yourself well there's dangers in that
because there's nothing to keep you
humble that's that's the most
appropriate objection there's nothing to
keep you humble and those things can
spiral out of control very rapidly and
and they did say in the case of Hitler I
mean it's easy to blame what happened in
Germany on Hitler but that's a that's a
big mistake because it was a dialogue
between Hitler and the German people
right Hitler didn't create himself it
was co-creation he said things people
listened and told him back what to say
and then he said them and they listened
and they told him back what to say and
it looped until he was the mouthpiece of
their darkest desires now that's a
that's a game he was willing to play but
you can't think about that as it isn't
like Hitler created Nazi Germany Hitler
and the Germans co-created Nazi Germany
you know when a a leader gives
articulation to the imagination of the
population that's what a leader does and
you know you could say that well Hitler
maybe Hitler filtered what the Germans
were telling him through a particular
lens because he had no shortage of
resentment and desire for revenge in his
own heart you know
um it's not like his life was a
spectacular success be before he became
a political activist and he was
brutalized very badly in World War I and
he didn't get to pursue his primary
dream which was to be an art student in
Vienna and he had applied three times
and got rejected all three times and so
he was bitter about that he was
basically living on the streets after
World War I he wasn't the world's
happiest person and I'm sure he carried
a fair bit of resentment in his heart
when he was in the trenches in World War
war I at at in one experience that he
had all of his friends were killed by a
mortar when he had wandered off to go do
something else so you know it's hard to
even imagine what something like that
would do to you but I can tell you when
you're the only Survivor out of 20
people that's also going to give you an
En enhanced sense of your own
specialness because the alternative is
just to think about how godamn arbitrary
the universe really is
so so Yung studied n in in great detail
and he was particularly interested
because Yung had his finger on the
central problems all the time right
because he was a great psychologist and
he was listening to what people said and
he was an a Staggering Genius as well
and so like n or dovi or Soul niton he
was that kind of prophetic type I would
say and he understood as well perhaps
what was wrong with nich's formulation
the idea that people could only create
their new their own values and that's
what would replace the lacking found the
foundation that was now lacking under
Western Civilization itself and he came
to his conclusion I would say through
because Freud started analyzing parts of
the human
cognitive process and content that
people hadn't attended to before in any
in any great detail and that was
primarily dreams you know the idea of
dream analysis I suppose is one of
Freud's perhaps Freud's major
contribution to Modern Western thought
the idea was there was something to
dreams and I I suppose what what Freud
did is said hey look isn't it strange we
have this whole other form of thought
that we engage in at night it it and it
speaks in a language that we don't
really understand and so what the hell
is that and you can say and many modern
people do dreams are of no significance
or even that they're random processes
which is an absurd proposition obviously
because they're by they're whatever they
are they're obviously not random so so
Freud's idea was that there was some
something in dreams that was
informative so that's his now he had a
method for describe for extracting out
from the dream what the dream purported
to represent and he outlined that in
great de detail in the interpretation of
dreams and if you want to read one book
by Freud I would highly recommend that
one it's a very long book and it's very
detailed but Freud does an
extraordinarily comprehensive analysis
of the way that dreams work now he made
the because because he had brought a
theoretical framework to Bear even on
his investigation into dream structure
he concluded that dreams were
essentially wish fulfillments and that's
where Yung and Freud disagreed he also
believed that the primary motivating
factor of human beings was sexual and
now that's a tougher one to toss aside
because even if you're a darwinian
rather than a Freudian you're going to
obviously support the proposition that
sexual motivation among any living
creature is going to be one of the
highest order motivations because
otherwise creatures don't reproduce and
and Prevail over the long run so the
question is is that the is that the
ultimate source of motivation and in
some sense the answer to that has to be
yes well Freud wanted to make that in
some ways the sole source of motivation
and I'm over simplifying and I hate to
do that in relationship to Freud because
he was not a simple-minded
character Yung had a dream Once if I
remember correctly that Freud and Yung
were
Excavating a basement and so Freud had
outlined in Freud had already discovered
the basement let's say so that would be
the unconscious structure of the psyche
and Yung broke through into another
basement that was a multi-chambered
place so many many many rooms and I
suppose what drove Yung and Freud apart
was Jung's proposition that there was a
hell of a lot more going down going on
down there than had already met the eye
and they broke on the idea that the
sexual impulse was primary roughly
speaking they broke when Yung wrote a
book called of transformation which is
actually there's there's three books
that I know of that are sort of like
maps of meaning one is symbols of
transformation one is a book by Eric
neyman called the origins and history of
Consciousness and the third and the
third one well his maps of meaning
they're the same book they're just like
they're trying to solve the same problem
from three different directions they're
all attempts to address the same problem
and so symbols of transformation was a
book that Yung wrote about the fantasies
of a schizophrenic um American woman and
he was he was trying to relate her
fantasies to these old mythological
ideas and yung's idea essentially and
this is an idea that was shared by
people like P so we we're not going to
say that y or Freud just pulled this
idea out of the air was
that the the birthplace of myth
mythology and literature for that matter
was the dream that that that they share
structural that they they share uh they
they share what mode of
information presentation and it's a
relatively radical hypothesis
but but given that they
both they both
represent dreams dreams and mythological
representations share an essentially
narrative structure and they use their
literary like you I mean it's not so
unreasonable to notice that a dream at
night is like the movie that you play in
your head and it's not unreasonable to
not as well that the dreams that you
have at night bear a relationship to the
Daydreams that you have during the day
it's a form of cognition it seems like
an involuntary form of cognition though
and that's a very strange thing so Yung
thought about the dream as nature
speaking of its own accord roughly
speaking and so his idea was well when
you when you sleep you dream but the
dream happens to you it's not something
that you create the way that and you
don't even think about creating it cuz I
might say well what are you thinking
about and you'll say I'm thinking about
whatever it is and you'll take credit in
some sense for thinking that because it
seems like a voluntary activity but what
happens at night is that you think but
you think involuntarily and so what Yung
would say is that means that something
is thinking in
you and that's a perfectly reasonable
way of of looking at it and this is one
of the things that's uncanny about the
psychoanalysts is they they were willing
to take their obervations to their
logical conclusion there are things that
think in
you what are those things and what are
they thinking and why are they thinking
it now if you do dream analysis and this
is a tricky thing because who's to say
if your damn analysis is correct right
it's very difficult to understand that
if you if you do dream analysis with
someone you generally have them lay out
their dream and then you ask them when
they're going through the dream a second
time you they lay out their dream and
you can kind of get a picture of it and
then they lay out their dream a second
time and as they go through it every
time they mention a detail or a
character you ask them what that reminds
them of and the hypothesis is that the
dream is presenting an image or an idea
that's associated with a network of
ideas and that if you can expand on the
network of ideas as you go through the
dream you can elaborate on the dream you
can expand it upwards and you can start
to see what it might be attempting to
put forward now Freud's idea was that
the dream knew what it was doing but
that its content was being suppressed
and oppressed by an internal sensor so
the dream had to be sneaky about what it
was saying because it was going to
deliver a message that the person didn't
want to hear and that that was tied up
with his idea of repression but that's
not yung's idea see yung's idea was
different he said no no the dream is
trying to tell you what it's trying to
tell you as clear as it can that's just
the best it can do and so you could
think of the dream and this is I believe
the right way to think about it the
dream is the birthplace of thought the
same way that artists are the birthplace
of culture it's exactly the same process
it's that your mind is groping outward
to try to comprehend what it has not yet
comprehended and it does that first by
trying to map it onto image and it's
doing that in the dream and it's
somewhat incoherent and and and well
let's stick with incoherent because it's
not a full-fledged thought it's the
birthplace of thought it's a fantasy
about what might be and then if you can
grip the
fantasy and share it with other people
then maybe they can elaborate upon it
and bring it into being with more
clarity than it would be if it merely
existed as the precursor of a thought in
your imagination now KZ yung's idea too
was okay you think you think in words
where the hell do those thoughts come
from well they just spring into my head
well that's not much of an answer they
just what pop out of the Void is there
some sort of precursor to the
development of the ideas is there a
developmental pathway so here's an image
this is the
Buddha there's calm water there's a
Lotus the roots go all the way down to
the bottom of the lake it's dark down
there the roots are embedded in the dark
substrata at the bottom of the lake the
plant moves upwards towards the light
the the water gets lighter and lighter
As you move upward with the root the
flower
manifests itself on the surface and the
Buddha sits in the middle that's an
image about how ideas develop they come
out from the bottom of reality and they
push themselves up towards the light and
they blast forward and something emerges
as a consequence that's what that image
means and it's an image the gold Buddha
that's sitting in the middle of the
lotus is an image of the perfect person
you could think about the gold Buddha
who sits in a triangle as exactly the
same thing that's the eye on the top of
the pyramid these are all the same ideas
there's and what's the idea that's
trying to burst forward how to be in the
world well what other idea would burst
forward because it's the only problem
that you really have right how should
you manifest yourself properly in the
world it's everyone's question it's the
ultimate question it's been the ultimate
question since the beginning of time and
we've been working out that idea forever
first of all merely by acting it out and
then by representing the actions and
then by representing the represent
presentations and spiraling all that
together so I started looking
developmentally I thought okay maybe
these idea have roots and this was
partly predicated on the observation
from doeski and NES and and and so forth
that there did seem to be a necessary
pattern in moral in in Morality there
seemed to be a necessary pattern it
wasn't arbitrary it was a it was a
representation of the specific mode of
human being and it isn't something
that's just imposed on you by your
culture it's not something that's just
learned it's intrinsic in you and it's
manifest in the culture at the same time
and there's a dial and and and there's a
dialogue between those two things
culture and nature where both where the
idea is embedded trying to make make
make the proper articulation of that
spring forward in each individual and
that's only to say these
aren't these aren't radical propositions
you're nature strives so that you can
manifest yourself properly in the world
culture strives to Aid you in that
endeavor is that is there something
about that that's that's that's of
dubious validity what else would it be
doing working for your death hardly
working for your destruction well you
could see that maybe when culture
becomes pathologized but to the degree
that it's able to maintain itself across
long periods of time it obviously has to
be striving in some way for the manif
for your individual manifestation so
that you can survive and flourish so
there's a there's a there's a cocreation
of the human being going on through
nature and through culture and well and
then perhaps with your
own with your own voluntary will
participating whatever the hell that is
something we don't understand at all and
are and are prone to dismiss because of
that so then I learned about p and p had
some very interesting ideas and I think
I've told you already what P was up to
he wasn't a developmental psychologist
he didn't even regard himself as a
psychologist he wanted to reconcile
science and religion that's what he was
doing through his entire bloody life
because it drove him crazy when he was
an adolescent and he didn't think that
he would be able to survive unless he
could bring those two things together so
he's working on the same problem and so
one of the things that P who was very
prone to Observation he was um an
ethologist of human beings that's a good
way of thinking about an ethologist is a
scientist who studies animals by
watching their behavior rather than
studying them under laboratory
conditions and he got very interested in
the spontaneous emergence of morality in
the play of children that was so smart
there so smart that idea that you know
when kids come together and unify
themselves towards a particular goal so
in play that a morality emerges out of
that and that that morality and i' I've
mentioned this before there's a morality
in game one there's a morality in game
two there's a morality in game three
what's common across all those
moralities is a meta morality and so the
metam morality emerges from the
particular moralities that are embedded
in particular Cooperative situations we
could say cooperative and competitive
situations you can expand that out to th
you can expand that out biologically to
some degree to the idea of the dominance
hierarchy right every Social Animal and
even many animals who aren't social are
embedded in a dominance hierarchy the
dominance hierarchy has a structure we
couldn't call it a dominance hierarchy
dominance hierarchy a b c d e thousands
of them across thousands of years you
extract out from all of them what's
Central to all of them that's the
Pyramid of value what's the what's the
qu what question do you need answered
about the Pyramid of value what's at the
top cuz that's the ideal that's the ey
at the top of the pyramid or the Golden
Buddha in the in the lotus it's the same
thing it's the same thing as the
crucifix paradoxically enough and that
has to do it has to do with something
like the voluntary acceptance and
therefore Transcendence of suffering
it's something like that these are not
arbitrary ideas they're deeply that's my
case anyways they're deeply deeply
deeply rooted in biology and culture
they're they're as deeply rooted in
biology as the dominance hierarchy is
rooted in biology and we already know
the answer to that the dominance
hierarchy has been around for 350
million years it's a long time you don't
get to just brush that off and say well
morality is some sort of second order
cognitive problem it's like no it's not
I mean I can I can tell you something
about its instantiation in your nervous
system you have a counter at the bottom
of your brain that keeps track of where
you are in terms of your status and it
bloody well regulates the sensitivity of
your emotions so if you're at the bottom
of the hierarchy barely Clinging On To
The World everything overwhelms you and
that's because you're damn near dead and
so everything should overwhelm you
you've got no extra resources any more
threat you're sunk so you become
extremely sensitive to negative emotion
and maybe also impulsive so that you
grab well the grabbing is good and if
you're near the top in the dominance
hierarchy and your counter tells you
that then your serotonin levels go up
you're less sensitive to negative
emotion you're less impulsive you live
long longer like everything works in
your favor your immune system functions
better and you're oriented at least to
some degree towards the medium and
long-term future and you can afford that
because all hell isn't breaking loose
around you all the time and so then the
question is is there a way of being that
increases the probability that you're
going to move up dominance hierarchies
well that doesn't seem to be a
particularly provocative proposition
unless you think that it's completely
arbitrary and random and that
you can think that if you want but I
don't think there's any evidence for
that whatsoever I mean we certainly have
even for sexual selection we impose
criteria they're not Ram random and
arbitrary
so okay so back to Yung so what was Yung
trying to do
well he was trying to see see Yung
believed that once we had stopped
populating the cosmos with gods that
they went
inside that's a good way of thinking
well think think about it this way you
know an archaic person looks at the sky
and uses his imagination to populate the
Sky What's the sky well it's the
constellations it's the do domain of the
Gods well why well because the gods are
what are be are out there beyond your
understanding well that's what you see
when you look up at the sky so you
populate the night sky with figures of
your imagination so the gods are the
things you broadcast out of your
imagination and see spread over the
world it's like the contents of your
unconscious are manifesting themselves
when you encounter the unknown it's
exactly what it is that's exactly how
how else could it be right you're
projecting your fantasy onto what you
don't understand that's how you start to
cope with what you don't understand you
populate the unknown with deities where
did they come from they came from your
imagination well what happens when you
take them out of the world do they dis
disappear no they just go back into your
imagination so that's where Yung dug
down to find them that's the same Motif
as rescuing your dead father from the
from or rescuing your father from the
belly of the whale it's the same idea is
that the corpses of the Gods inhabit
your imagination so where do you go if
you need to revivify them you go into
your imagination and that's exactly what
Yung did and I mean this is no secret if
you read Yung he tells you that's what
he did tells you that's why he did it
it's not an interpretation on my part
well so then then the question is what's
down there is it just mess and
catastrophe or is there something in it
that's patterned while yung's
proposition was that you red you
ReDiscover the great archetypes that
guide human being by investigating the
structure of your imagination when he
thought about the imagination in some
sense at least in part as a
manifestation of your of your bi ology
well yes what else would it be you know
and I told you that story about my
nephew I believe right about him running
around as a knight and then going off to
have a combat with the dwarves and the
Dragons It's like well where did that
come from well partly it came from his
culture right because it he was a knight
and and so obviously that's a cultural
construct but the thing is is that his
imagination is it's this structure
that's looking for things to fill itself
with just like your predisposition to
language you have a predisposition to
language what is that we don't know what
does it do it looks for things in the
world to fill itself with right and if
you're if you first of all when you
start to learn how to speak you Babble
every phon did did you know that there's
there's lot there's if I was learning to
speak an Asian language there would be
phones I couldn't pronounce and vice
versa an infant all of them they Babble
all the phones and then as they start to
learn the language they lose the ability
to say a bunch of them and only retain
the ones that are relevant to that
language so a baby babbles all Lang all
possible languages that's a way of
thinking about it and then loses the
ability so that's a manif that's you can
see there so you could say well you
manifest the potential to be possessed
by all the set of all possible
archetypes it's built into your biology
and then as you're inculturated in your
own culture the set of archetypes that
manifest it manifest themselves in that
culture are the ones that you pull in
for your own use so my my nephew is
running around like a knight well you
know if he would have been born in the
middle of the Amazon he would have been
running around with a bow and you know a
poisoned arrow and a bow it's the same
thing it's the same idea it's just
trapped out in in different cultural
dress and he he his little imagination
was trying to solve the problem how do
you deal with the unknown well what's
the unknown it's these little Devils
that keep biting jumping up on you and
biting you and they come out without end
so just killing them it's like cutting
the head off the Hydra right seven more
grow well what the hell good is it to
solve one problem when there's just a
bunch more problems that are come going
to come after you and that's everyone's
question that's the ultimate question of
nihilism right why bother solving a
problem if all that's going to happen is
that 20 more problems are going to come
your way why not just give up and die
well right it's a good question it's the
it's a good question right is the
suffering so intense that the whole game
should just be brought to an end that's
another fundamental question of
existence and people who've become truly
malevolent answer that question in the
affirmative they say it's too much we
should destroy it now I wouldn't say
they're precisely doing it only for
humanitarian reasons but you have to
understand and appreciate the logic it's
not irrational that's the other thing
it's not irrational to work for the
destruction of being it's not
irrational in fact it might be the most
rational thing you could come up with
depends on your initial initial set of
presuppositions so Yung down into the
belly of the Beast so to speak to to to
to to see what lurks in the imagination
he sees the birthplace of archetypal
ideas well what are archetypal ideas
they're they patterns of AD you could
think about them as as representations
of patterns of adaptive behavior and so
then you might ask well where did they
come from well that's part of what I've
been trying to to to teach you
about they evolved as far as I can tell
right they evolved collectively is that
our society and this is the dominance
hierarchy idea dominance hierarchy set
themselves up as a matter of course
they're the standard way that anim
organized themselves in a
territory well okay human beings are
watching those dominance hierarchies
since we became self-aware thinking what
the hell are we up to what the hell are
we up to what's and and there's a
question that lurks in there what
constitutes acceptable power what
constitutes acceptable sovereignty who
should lead who should rule what should
be at the top well we talked about that
the Mesopotamians figured that out
speech and vision that's Marduk speech
vision and the willingness to confront
the terrible unknown that's what should
rule well what is that an arbitrary idea
or is that a great idea how could it be
any other way well that's what human
beings are like and I I don't think that
you can read the Mesopotamian
story and understand the reference which
isn't an easy thing to do and fail to
draw that conclusion mic has eyes all
the way around his head he speaks magic
words he goes off to fight Tiamat the
dragon of Chaos well what's that that's
the reptilian Predator that lurks in the
unknown well is any of
that is there anything about any of that
that stands in opposition to what you
were would presume if you were just
analyzing our situation from a purely
biological perspective we're prey
animals we're Predators we've been
threatened by reptiles forever why
wouldn't we use the Predator that lurks
in the dark forest or the water as a
representative of the Unown own why
wouldn't we harness that circuitry we
already have it at hand and even more to
the point how could we do anything else
it's it makes perfect sense well so then
you might say well what would you want
to be king you could say king of the
world or king of your own soul what do
you want to subordinate yourself to how
about your heroic willingness to
encounter the unknown and articulate it
and share that with people there's no
nobler vision than that and I I don't
see that it's merely
arbitrary and so and it's not merely
arbitrary too because if you do that to
the degree that you do that assuming
your Society isn't entirely corrupt you
will be successful it will actually Aid
you practically you'll rise up above men
you'll be selected by women you'll be
admirable you'll be valued and and you
know that because if you look at the
people that you admire and value again
unless you've taken detour into Dark
Places and are are are are are possessed
with admiration for people who are
working for malevolent purposes and for
Destruction you just have to watch the
people that you admire and try to figure
out what's common across them and draw
your own conclusions and you can ask
yourself too when you're torturing
yourself with your conscience because
you're not doing what you should be and
you know it what is it that you're
torturing yourself in relationship to
you have a vision of your own ideal and
you torment yourself if you're not
matching it what's the ideal well you
don't know right it's it's kind of
incoherent and and poorly articulated
but that doesn't mean it isn't trying to
manifest itself and and make itself
known to you it's really the purpose of
religious education is to make that
ideal
articulated well we've lost
that it's not a good
thing okay so I talked to you about the
Mesopotamian story and I talked to you
about the Egyptian story and what I
thought it meant and it's a bit of an
elaboration on the same theme because it
says while the hero isn't only the the
deity the Transcendent pattern let's say
that goes out into the unknown cuts it
into pieces and makes the world that's
not good enough because it it only deals
with the terrible mother that's one way
of thinking about it but there's a
terrible father too once culture gets
instantiated in in in large scale and
the Egyptians had that problem two
problems chaos second problem
pathological order well structures tend
towards pathological order the Egyptians
laid out why that's Seth right Seth is
the evil adviser of the king who's
lurking in the background all the time
trying to tear the structure down for
his own malevolent purposes so now and
then that overcomes the structure and
destroys the and and what rigidifies and
makes malevolent the entire social
structure so it degenerates into say
fascist totalitarianism something like
that and and that's been a threat since
we've had highly organized
societies then the hero ends up in the
Underworld and has to come back and and
do direct combat with that malevolent
Force at the price of his own
Consciousness right because a Horus gets
one of his eyes destroyed it's no bloody
joke to face the forces that make a
culture rigid and malevolent so there's
an addition to the hero archetype two
things happen one you go out and you
conquer chaos and you make order out of
it but the second is you take
pathological order recast it into chaos
and then allow it to reemerge and you do
that not in some arbitrary sense but in
tandem with your rescued father and
that's I guess in part what n m missed
as far as I can tell is he didn't he
knew that he knew of the death of God
perhaps he didn't know that it had
happened many times mer eliad documented
that across many cultures but what n
didn't seem to lay out at least in his
vision of the Superman or the Overman
was that it was a responsibility of the
person who wants to revivify the culture
to go down and rescue the damn culture
which is what you're supposed to be
doing in University because your father
is lying dead in the libraries right so
you're supposed to be going in there and
taking that Spirit out of the books and
manifesting it in your own being that's
what the universities were for although
I don't think that's what they're for
anymore so we talked about the
Mesopotamian story and we talked about
the Egyptian story and other people have
documented the emergence of hero
mythology in cultures far more diverse
than the ones that I'm exposing you to
that was done most popularly by Joseph
Campbell but Campbell's like I don't
think Campbell had a single idea that he
didn't derive from Yung and I I'm not
saying that in a in a critical manner
because Campbell was good at standing as
a mediator between Yung and and a more
general population he did and that's
that's a non-trivial
um accomplishment seriously but but but
Yung is still the source of those ideas
and if you're serious about them that's
the person that you have to go to for
that kind of
knowledge so now I wanted to tell you
some other stories that are that are in
some sense closer to Western culture
they're the stories upon which Western
culture is actually predicated so I'm
going to tell you well I'm not only
Western story today I'm going to tell
you a couple of stories from Genesis and
I'm going to tell you about the story of
the Buddha I'm going to do that at the
same time because the story of the
Buddha is almost a perfect parallel
structurally speaking to the story of
Adam and Eve and so I want to show you
that and you can decide for yourself if
I'm imposing a pattern on it because God
only knows right or whether or not once
you have the key to understanding the
stories which I hope I provided you with
with the you know the idea of the Dragon
of chaos and the great mother and the
great father and the individual it gives
you a schema that you can use to
understand the characterizations of
great stories and as far as I can tell
it works pretty much universally across
stories so so I want to read I want to
walk you through those foundational
stories and I would say one of the
things to know about the way the Bible
is structured there's a couple of things
you want to know about it is that it was
authored by multiple people across
extraordinarily vast spans of time and
then aggregated by other people and
sorted into something that seemed to
make sense and so you can really think
about it as a cuz Bible is is a library
it's a library of books it's not a book
the library is organized a certain way
that makes a kind of sense but it's not
exactly as if anyone decided what that
sense would be it's the collaborative
work of hundreds and thousands of people
across thousands of years attempting to
organize a collective story into
something that something out of which
the sense emerges it's like human beings
acted and then they dream dreamed about
how they acted and then they wrote down
what they dreamed about how they acted
and then they organized what they wrote
about how they dreamed they acted and
that's how that book came into being and
the information that's within it emerged
from the behavioral level upward right
rather than being imposed top down now
there's a there's a feedback right
because if you understand how you act
then that changes how you act and so you
can't you can't avoid the top- down
feedback but a tremendous amount of the
information in there and this is why
it's revelatory information we don't
know it's in there because how we Act is
informative and then if you represent
how we act that's informative but the
information came from how we act not
from the representation of how we act
and then you might think well how did we
learn how to act and the answer is we've
been trying to figure out how to do that
for 3.5 billion years there's a lots of
information encoded in our actions and
in our social interactions way more than
we understand so we're acting something
out we don't understand what it is but
we're doing our best to pull that
information upward partly by dreaming
about it that's what you're doing at
night you're trying to figure out what
the hell you're up to well you don't
know because you don't know yourself in
totality how could you possibly know
best you can do is dream yourself up and
then speak yourself into some sort of
articulated existence it's just an
approximation because you who whatever
you is whatever you are rapidly
supersedes whatever you think you are
that's why people constantly shock
themselves you know if you were only
what you thought of yourself well
wouldn't life be simple you'd know
exactly what you were doing all the time
and you could even control your own
behavior well good luck with that you
can't do that for yourself much less for
other
people so let's go through these
stories so they're
sequenced people are trying to make
sense out of them they're aggregating
these stories from all sorts of
different places all sorts of different
tribes all sorts of different times and
then trying to make them coherent
without losing the content and without
doing arbitrary editing and so part of
the reason that the Bible is full of
internal contradictions is for the same
reason that a dream is full of internal
contradictions is if you impose too much
coherence on it you start losing
the look imagine you have an imagine
that you have a impressionist
painting well it's messy and and and the
the image emerges and you might say well
we could replace that with a nice clean
line
drawing or even a sequence of stick
figures and get the basic point across
it's like well you would but you'd lose
the the richness the UN articulable
richness would be lost in the premature
attempt to bring logical closure to the
phenomena and so in fact we know already
that that's maybe the difference between
dreams and waking thought so waking
thought sacrifices completeness for
coherence right so whereas dream thought
sacrifices coherence for completeness
and that's that's that's not something
I'm saying arbitrarily this is something
that has been thought through by people
who've been thinking this sort of thing
through for a long time precise
thought excludes too
much and imprecise thought is not
sufficiently coherent so we do both
precise thought left hemisphere
linguistically mediated sequential
logical incoherent but complete thought
imagistic emotion-based right hemisphere
the right hemisphere even has a more
diffus structure it's like the right
hemisphere is trying to get a picture of
everything now it's not going to be a
very detailed picture because it's a
picture of Everything full of
contradictions but at least it's a
picture of everything and the left says
that's not good enough for precise
action and it's not so we'll narrow that
to Precision but we lose the richness
but you need both so there's an
interplay well the documents that the
Bible is composed of are half dream and
half articulated thought and they have
the advantages of articulated thought
and the advantages of the dream but also
Northern of Vancouver Island and the
culture he comes from is about 14,000
years old something like that and maybe
it's been unbroken for 14,000 years very
long period of time and he he's not
literate this guy although he's very
intelligent has a great memory and is
also a great artist and he's told me
some of the stories that that have come
down through the quaqua qua tradiction
and he was educated by his grandparents
who were original language speakers and
he's an original language speaker so
there aren't many people like that left
I think there's only 3,000 in his
particular tribal group they have a
story that's the flood story that this
except it's cans and it isn't a dove
it's a crow but the damn story is
exactly the same it's like well what the
hell's up with that in fact at the end
it's not a canoe it's a bunch of canoes
that are tied together and at the end
the canoes all break apart and that's
why there are people all over the world
it's like the story of the Tower of
Babel which I'm going to talk to you
about today it's
so
the reason I'm telling you that is
because the stories at the beginning of
Genesis are extraordinarily old now so
maybe he tells the same story that we
tell you know making the presumption
that we are the people who who are part
of this judeo-christian tradition and I
know that that's not the case for
everyone either he's telling the same
damn story and it emerged from a central
point so long ago that it's 20,000 years
or 30,000 years or maybe 50,000 years
since we moved out of Africa something
like that and the story has survived
which is certainly possible because oral
you think can an oral tradition survive
that long that's the wrong question oral
Traditions always survive that long
what's radical is that they disappear
we're the radicals the oral tradition is
something that stays the same generation
after generation so how much Innovation
do you think there is in small tribal
group none that's why they don't have
Advanced Technologies they stay the same
the stories stay the same so the idea
that they can be transmitted unchanged
over thousands and tens of thousands of
years is really not a debatable
proposition it's the norm so either the
stories emerged from a central source
and have never been lost so that you can
pick them up everywhere or there's
something about the stories that
automatically regenerates themselves and
I suppose it's a little bit of call and
a little bit of column be it's like my
my nephew when he perceived himself as a
dragon slaying Knight it's like well was
that the continuation of an oral
tradition or was it something that he
spontaneously come up with and the
answer is both both the pattern was
there he just had to see it and he saw
it and synthesized it and and
encapsulated it in his own
imagination well that's not much
different than the oral tradition being
unbroken it's it's just a variant of the
same thing I mean if you lose a story
but everyone acts it out you can
reconstruct the story right and if
everyone doesn't acted out then the
culture dies because there's some things
about the story that you have to act out
if your culture is going to survive
that's the hypothesis and then that
would be well that would be where you
would search for ultimate values the
stories that enable you as an individual
to flourish in such a manner that your
culture flourishes in a way to enhance
your flourishing right that's the right
way that you want to organize things you
know that's what you do inside a family
if it's functioning well right the
family functions so that every
individual benefits from being in the
family and that strengthens the family
that's what PJ called an equilibrated
solution technically speaking when he
was looking for the origin of moral
ideas he came up with the idea of
equilibrated equilibrated uh State and
an equilibrated state is one the three
of you are in an equilibrated state if
you all want to be in that State and
while you're in that state the things
that you're doing together work better
and they facilitate each of your
development right so it's the stacking
of of of of an ethical of a set of
ethical propositions so that the
individual benefits at the same time as
the group and you can you can increase
that stacking we could say well it's not
only that you want to organize yourself
so that all three of you get what you
want better than you would if you were
alone and so that you're healthy and so
the stack in also occurs all the way
down the physiological chain you want to
be manifesting yourself in the world so
that you remain as physiologically
healthy as you possibly can so your
stress responses are properly balanced
and all of that and then maybe your
equilibrated state is well enough
developed so it doesn't just include the
three of you it extends outward Beyond
you into the Greater Community and
things stack like that and that's if
they if they all get stacked up every
level is stacked on top of each other
properly you have an equilibrated State
and I don't think that that's any
different than a vision of paradise I
think those are the same thing so now
the question is well can that
happen that's a whole different story I
mean it happens in your own life at
those times where everything comes
together for you you know it's chaotic
and then everything snaps together and
you think that's exactly right and it's
unstable you can't maintain it it
fragments again but that's what you're
that's what you're working towards if
you have any sense you're working
towards that constantly and I think
that's what music represents it's this
stacking of harmonious patterns right
that are playing themselves out in being
and you watch how people respond to
music the orchestra is led by the leader
every different individual plays his or
her part they're organized into string
sections and horn sections and so on so
you get individual subgroup group
orchestra leader then maybe you have
people dancing well so what does that
mean so maybe it's men and women dancing
in front of that like a vienes waltz so
it's the the harmonious stacking of
patterned being in the background led by
someone who's making sure that the time
is in order and men and women arranging
themselves according to the patterns
right and everyone has a wonderful time
when that's happening and it's acting
out the it's acting out the proposition
that all of these levels of being can be
stacked up harmoniously at the same time
and everybody has a tremendously fun
time while they're doing it maybe that's
how you find a mate at a dance and for
exactly the same reason it's an optimal
place to do that you see if there's
someone that you can be with with whom
you can mutually act out the patterns of
being well we're all acting that out at
a dance we don't know what we're doing
we're having a good time well yeah
that's a little glimpse of paradise
that's what that good time is now the
Bible stories before what happens what
seems to happen is
that you can there's there's two
cataclysmic events at the first part of
at at the end of the first part of
Genesis there's the flood so the
prehistoric world is wiped out by the
flood and so the idea there in some
sense there's a bunch of ideas but one
of them is there's a place in history
past which we cannot look and that's
absolutely true one of the things that's
very strange about human beings is that
our written civilizations the ones we
have records of all seem to have popped
up somewhere in the neighborhood of 5 to
6,000 years ago doesn't matter where you
look right Central America China China
India Greece Egypt it's all the same
6,000 years ago poof there we were well
what happened before that well the
answer is we don't know everything is
obscured by the chaos of History before
that point and all that's emerged out of
it so to speak are these incredibly
ancient stories and so we're going to
walk through the ancient stories and see
what we can pull out of them we've
already done that with several so so
there's some representations of the
Garden of Eden so this is by heronimus
Bosch I don't know if you know who
heronimus Bosch is but he's definitely
worth looking up because he was one
strange character he was like I think he
painted in the 15th century if I
remember correctly he was like this 15th
century version of Salvador Deli his
paintings are so uncanny that that
they're still shocking to the modern eye
which is really something because it's
not easy to shock a modern person with a
visual image but Honus Bosch will
definitely do that and that's his
representation of paradise there's some
Central structure in the middle that's
partly felic and partly chambered so and
there's Adam and
Eve United by God so and there's one by
Peter Paul Rubin and it's sort of the
primordial Lush landscape that you might
think about as the what the ancestral
human home it's something like
that a treed landscape well why trees
well we like fruit we lived in trees why
not trees I mean even modern people have
very powerful tendency to think about
trees as sacred you wouldn't get
environmentalists tying themselves to
Great you know Douglas Furs and
protecting them if there wasn't some
deep felt sense within us that they're
sacred whatever that means well trees
are our home that's as close to sacred
as you're going to get
so okay so I'm going to read you
something from The Book of Job And this
is
God harassing job so I don't know if you
know the story of job but it's a very
interesting story and basically what
happens with job is that God and the
devil have a bet which seems a little
you know on the unreasonable
side for God but he gets to do whatever
he wants so he has a bet with Satan
roughly speaking and
says he says well job he tells Satan
that job is a good guy and that he's
faithful to God and and Satan says yeah
let me at let me at him for a while I
bet you we can do something about that
God says roughly speaking no you can
torture him all you want he's going to
stay faithful and and and Satan says
well we'll have a bet on that and so God
hands him over and what happens to job
it's like everything terrible that you
can imagine then happens to job right
his his all his family dies all his
possessions are destroyed he gets a
horrible skin disease and so then he's
sitting there by the fire sort of
scraping himself with bits of broken
pots and all his friends come around and
tell him that the reason all this
happened to him was because he deserved
it so it's perfect right it's it's it's
it's like an ultimate suffering story
it's a precursor to the idea of the
crucifix that's one way of thinking
about it so and uh job has a chat with
God and asks him like Cain did roughly
what's going on and God attempts to he's
irritated that job would even dare to
question him it's like he's God he gets
to do whatever he wants it's a very
strange book anyways this is one of the
things that God says to job well God is
trying to justify himself I would say to
job and the reason I'm telling you this
you see is because so imagine that
you're trying to analyze a literary work
you might say well where's the meaning
in the literary work and the answer is
it's in the
words word by word it's in the phrases
it's in the sentences it's in the
relationship of the sentences to each
other it's in the relationship of the
sentences within paragraphs it's in the
relationship of the paragraphs within
the contexts of the chapters and it's in
the relationship between the chapters
and the whole book and then the book in
the whole culture so you can't it's not
easy to localize the meaning it exists
at all those levels simultaneously and
they all inform one another and what
that means and it's even worse in a book
like the Bible I want to show you a
picture this is an amazing
picture so let me tell you what this is
so the Bible is the world's first
hyperlink document that's a good way of
thinking about it so what you have here
so what you see at the
bottom there's a line along the bottom
and then there's small lines coming down
from it okay each of those the line has
dots on it each dot is a is a
verse okay and then there's a line
associated with the verse that's a
varying length and the length
corresponds to how many times that verse
is cross referenced somewhere else in
the document
and then these rainbow colored lines are
the cross
references so now that's really worth
thinking about so then you think well
that book is deep well why is it deep
well it's because every single thing in
it refers to every other thing it's
connected like your brain is connected
like it's not a linear document and the
re the thing is a book is a very strange
thing right because when you or even a
story because when you lay out the story
in some sense you're like God you're
outside of the space and time of the
story and so you can adjust the end to
make the beginning different you know
how if you watch a movie and it's got a
surprise ending it changes the beginning
you thought the beginning was one thing
but it isn't it's something else well
when you lay out a story you can fiddle
with the story anywhere in the story and
so and you can also make something that
happens before dependent on something
that happens after which is very strange
and that's what's happened with the
Bible because people have worked on it
worked on it worked on it worked on it
trying to synthesize it and and make it
coherent and make it make sense and so
they're continually connecting
everything that's inside of it to
everything else and so you end up with a
document map that looks like that so now
so you think about that everything is
connected to everything in that document
not chaotically but meaningfully just
like your brain is connected in a
meaningful way it's not everything isn't
connected to everything it's connected
in a meaningful way and then you think
well where what do the stories mean and
then the answer is well that's a hard
question because of them are connected
with each other and then there's all
these different levels of analysis and
so you can pull out meanings at one
level of analysis that aren't
self-evident at another level of
analysis just like if you're listening
to a complex piece of symphonic music
you can follow a baseline or you can
follow the strings or you can follow the
horns and they're all harmoniously
interrelated but they're also separable
okay so there's an image that lurks in
the Old Testament and the image is the
same image it's roughly the same image
as the image of Marduk confronting
Tiamat so for example at the at the
beginning God makes here's here's how
the beginning goes in the beginning God
created the Heaven and the Earth and the
Earth was without form and void and
darkness was upon the face of the deep
and the spirit of God moved upon the
face of the waters and God said let
there be light and there was light okay
so we got to look at the first few lines
here so this is God justifying himself
to job he says can you pull in Leviathan
with a fish hook or tie down its tongue
with a rope can you put a cord through
its nose or Pierce its jaw with a hook
will it keep you begging for mercy will
it speak to you with gentle words will
it make an agreement with you for you to
take it as your slave for life can you
make a pet of it like a bird or put it
on a leash for the young women in your
house will Traders barter for it will
they divide it up among the merchants
can you fill its hide with harpoons or
its head with fishing
Spears if you lay a hand on it you will
remember the struggle and never do it
again any hope of subduing it is false
the mere sight of it is
overpowering no one is fierce enough to
Rouse it who is then able to stand
against me who has a claim against me
that I must pay everything under Heaven
belongs to
me
more computer trouble oh there we
go I will not fail to speak of
leviathan's Limbs its strength and its
graceful form who can strip off its
outer coat who can penetrate its double
coat of armor Who Dares open the doors
of its mouth ringed about with fearsome
teeth its back has rows of shields
tightly sealed together each is so close
to the next that no air can pass between
they are joined fast to to one another
they cling together and cannot be parted
its snorting throws out flashes of light
its eyes are like the Rays of dawn
Flames stream from its mouth Sparks of
fire shoot out smoke pours from its
nostrils as from a Boiling Pot over Bor
burning reads its breath sets coals
Ablaze and Flames Dart from its mouth
strength resides in its neck dismay goes
before it the folds of its flesh are
tightly joined they are firm and
immovable its chest is as hard as rock
hard as a lower Millstone when it rises
up the mighty are terrified they Retreat
before it's
thrashing the sword that reaches it has
no effect nor does the spear or the dart
or the javelin iron it treats like straw
and bronze like a rotten wood arrows do
not make it flee sling stones are like
chaff to it a club seems to it but a
piece of straw it laughs at the rattling
of the Lance its undersides are Jagged
pot shirs leaving a trail in the mud
like a threshing Sledge it makes the
depths churn like a boiling cauldron and
stees up the sea like a pot of ointment
it leaves a glistening wake behind it
one would think the Deep had white hair
nothing on Earth is its equal a creature
without fear it looks down on all that
are haughty and is King over all that
are proud well so what's God doing he's
describing what he defeated in order to
create the world
that's Mard
andat okay so that's that's one
reference like that all right so now
another reference like that this is from
Psalms
74 yet God is my king of old working
salvation in the midst of the earth thou
D break the sea in pieces by thy
strength thou did shatter the heads of
the sea monsters in the waters thou did
crush the heads of Leviathan right
that's the creature that we just heard
described thou gavest him to be food to
the folk inhabiting the Wilderness now
you remember so T when M defeats Tiamat
he cuts her into pieces and makes the
world out of her pieces and here what's
happening is that the force that that
encounters the Leviathan is able to
break it into pieces and feed everyone
with it now the reason I'm telling you
that in relationship to this is because
and the Earth was without form and void
and darkness was upon the face of the
deep let me tell you a little bit about
that those
lines before God's God begins to create
the world is toou woho that's from the
Hebrew the word toou by itself means
emptiness or futility so there's a
psychological element to that a and that
emptiness or futility in some sense is
is what you confront when you're trying
to extract your life from the world it
is used to describe the desert
Wilderness as
well
um too waboo chaos is the condition that
bar ordering remedies okay so there's
the idea in the first vers is that this
initial chaos is being ordered and the
order is what makes the world so the
it's it's it's standard
cosmology order emerges out of chaos and
the thing that makes it emerge is the
word of God now darkness and deep which
is Tome in Hebrew are two of the three
elements of the chaos represented in TOA
toou woho the third is the formless
earth in the Anum Alish the deep is
personified as the god godess Tiamat the
enemy of Marduk here it is the formless
body of primeval Waters surrounding the
habitable World okay so but we know T
and Tiamat are the same word or at least
T was derived from tat so the idea
that's presented at the beginning of
Genesis is the same it's an abstracted
and psychologized representation of the
story that the Mesopotamians put forward
so yahwa is Marduk roughly speaking
going out and conquering the dragon of
chaos and making order out of it and
then there are these Illusions later say
in job and in the Psalms of him doing
exactly that conquering a primordial
monster and making the world out of its
pieces well so what does that mean
exactly well it means that the highest
ordering principle is the spirit that
goes out into the darkness or the deep
that encounters the dragon of chaos
because of obviously Leviathan is a
dragon and defeats it and feeds the
people as a consequence well we are
hunting creatures after all and in order
to establish our place in the world we
had to go out there and conquer the
dragons of the Wilderness you might
wonder why does a dragon breathe fire
well there's a bunch of reasons as far
as I can tell fire is awe inspiring so
fire and a terrible Predator are the
same thing because they both Inspire awe
fire is transforming but pred like
what's a good metaphor for being bitten
by a poisonous snake well have you ever
seen the wounds that a poisonous snake
produces if you're bitten by them it's
like someone took your arm and
incinerated it and so the idea that a
snake has fiery breath is well let's
call it close enough from a metaphorical
perspective right now God is claiming to
job that he's the spirit that clear that
clears the Wilderness and then builds
order out of chaos and because
because because he's the embodiment of
that spirit in some sense job has no
reason to ever question his moral
decisions it's something like that in
the story of job but the point that that
point we'll leave aside because it's a
more complicated issue the point is that
the writers of the Bible are trying to
dream up a representation of the spirit
of civilization that's the right way to
think about it you can think of yahwah
as the spirit of civilization and what
is that well it's the thing that
encounters the Wilderness and makes
habitable order but then it's also the
spirit of the order itself and that's I
think why in Christianity there's a
representation of God the father because
he's a representation of the the culture
that's generated after the the chaos is
ordered right you have the spirit that
goes out into chaos and orders and then
you have the spirit of the order and
then the spirit of the order and the
spirit of the ordering Prin have to
figure out how to coexist that's partly
what the Egyptians were trying to figure
out right there's a dynamic relationship
between the culture and the spirit that
generates the culture and then you might
also ask should the culture be
superordinate or should the spirit that
generates the culture be superordinate
and the answer seems to be the emergent
answer seems to be that the spirit that
generates the culture should be
superordinate to the spirit of the
culture it's something like that and
that's also why I think that one of the
brilliant
discoveries let's say of Western
individualistic civilization is that the
group is there to serve the individual
because the individual is the thing that
revivifies the group so each depend on
the other integrally but if you
subordinate the individual to the group
then the group stagnates and dies and so
that's a very bad long-term strategy
even though the group and belonging to
the group is clearly necessary you need
to uphold the values of the group but
the values of the group should be
subordinated to producing the individual
who gives the group vision and the
Mesopotamians figured that out the
Egyptians figured that out we figured it
out we just don't know that we figured
it out and it's not a mere arbitrary
supposition all
right
so I should show you because this is
actually interesting I think
perhaps
good
I want to show you what the
cosmology what people considered the COS
the the the the the structure of the
initial order because it's kind of
interesting and God said let there be a
firmament in the midst of the waters and
let it divide the waters from the waters
and God made the firmament and divided
the waters which were under the
firmament from the waters which were
above the firmament and it was so and
God called the firmament Heaven and the
evening and the morning were the second
day well so what are they thinking about
well that's the sort of classical view
of the world it's something like that is
that there's a uh a disc that's the disc
we inhabit and there's land that's the
disc and under the disc there's water
fresh water and then under that there's
the ocean and then on top of that
there's a dome and that's the sky that's
the firmament that's heaven and there's
water above that well obviously because
it rains so there has to be water up
there so that's the way the co Cosmos
was conceptualized just so you know now
it's a phenomenological
conceptualization because that's what it
looks like right and you might say well
that's wrong it's like well yes
it's it's wrong in a functional sort of
way it's right from a phenomenological
perspective but it's wrong from a well
from a scientific perspective was never
designed to be a scientific perspective
so all right so we won't bother with
this
part
we'll we'll start here so God makes
animals and plants and all of that and
then at the end of it this is on the
which
day
sixth day God said let us make man in
our image after our likeness and let
them have dominion over the fish of the
Sea and the fowl of the air and over the
cattle and all of the earth and over
every creeping thing that creepeth upon
the Earth okay well the relevant there's
two relevant issues there one is let us
make man in our image after our likeness
well what exactly does that mean well
we've already we've already encountered
that to some degree we've already
encountered what the nature of the
spirit of God is in this
story the nature of the spirit of God
that creates order out of chaos is the
thing that creates order out of chaos
and so the the statement here is that
there's something about human
beings that partakes in that now when I
started unpacking this I thought okay
look there's an idea that's at the root
of our legal system and so our legal
system is the articulation of the
patterns by which we live and to a fair
degree it's it's an evolved system it's
a culturally constructed system but it's
an evolved system as well and it's
predicated on the idea that there's
something about the individual that the
law has to respect well so the question
is well is that just an arbitrary
supposition because that's really the
question it's the same question as is
Western Civilization founded on
something that's a rock or is it just
founded on something that's an opinion
well it's the same question with regards
to the law the law assumes that there's
something about you that's Sovereign
even if you're a murderer you have
inalienable rights now you think that is
a bloody weird thing for any sort of
system to have come up with because the
idea that if you're the ultimate in
malevolent transgressors that you still
have some sort of sovereign value it's
like that is such an unlikely thing for
people to think up that you really have
to think a long time about how that
might have come to be well there's an
idea here that's the idea is that
there's something about human beings men
and women you know because people often
complain about the patriarchal structure
of the Bible it's based on a
misapprehension of anthropology that was
popularized by someone named gimbutas at
UCLA is for for her perspective there's
not a shred of historical evidence
although there's some psychological
truth in it in in Genesis both men and
women are created in the image of God
and that's quite a remarkable thing I
think it's a it's a remarkable part of
the document because it's not what you'd
expect from a p patriarchal you know
from a from a document that was designed
to do nothing but extend the Dominion of
the patriarch it's like you would have
left women with the damn cattle that
would have made things a lot easier and
that isn't what happened so both men and
women have this image and what's the
image well that's the image of the thing
that can order chaos and so it's
necessary to treat you as if you have
intrinsic value because the fact that
you can partake in the process of
mediating between order and chaos means
that you're basically the salvation of
society that's what it means and so
Society can't impose on you to too great
a degree because you are too valuable
for even the law to push arbitrarily
past a certain point now then you have
to think this and this is this is this
is where you really have to think about
what you believe do you believe that or
not because there's not much difference
really technically speaking there's not
much difference than that between that
and believing these stories it depends
bloody well what you mean by believe
they're not scientific representations
of an evolutionary process obviously the
people who came up with them weren't
scientists so whatever they are they're
not that but they're making a
proposition it's not an accidental
proposition and we know that partly
because it's rooted so deeply in these
ancient stories we have no idea how old
the Mesopotamian story is you know it's
the oldest story we have in written form
so we know that but God only knows how
old it is it's part of an oral tradition
and these oral Traditions can
be look the same Carver gave me a big
thing called a seaal and it's a man in
the middle of a double-headed sea
serpent right so there there that's
14,000 years old that came from Siberia
it's the same bloody idea it's the same
idea so these ideas aren't arbitrary so
the question is well are they true well
then the question is what the hell do
you mean by true because it comes down
to that is it true that habitable order
is dependent on the spirit that moves
into the unknown and takes the Leviathan
and chops it into pieces and distributes
it and the answer to that is yes that's
true as far as I can tell and do you
mean is it literally true well it's just
true as things get that's how we got
here we got here because people went
into the unknown they conquered what was
out there they took what was of utility
from that they brought it back and they
shared it with the community that's why
we're here that is the central story of
humankind and that's still what we do
you know we're not exactly necessarily
going out to conquer an embodied monster
although we do that if we hunt for
example but you know most of us don't do
that anymore but to the degree that
you're an Explorer in the intellectual
realm you're still going out into the
unknown and conquering what's out there
looming like maybe it's it's the cure
for a disease you're looking that right
in the face you're trying to decomp
compose it and break it into its parts
you're trying to understand it then
you're trying to tell everybody what you
found well then everybody Pats you on
the back and says well you're you're
you're a brave Explorer of the unknown
well that is exactly the sort of thing
that we should be fostering and it's the
thing that we all admire so okay so that
happens on the sixth day and uh so now
we know human beings are made in God's
image well what does that mean
exactly
I think I think what it means a
reasonable way of thinking about it you
can think about it like the genie the
genie has this tremendous amount of
power that's constrained in a very small
space and Genie and genius are the same
word roughly speaking so the genius is
the your Genius is the genie that
inhabits you right it's this logo spirit
it's it's put in a very small container
you see that idea represented in the
Christian conception of the relationship
between Christ and God because there's
an idea that God had to empty himself
out in order to fit into the body of
Christ it's something like that they
call that kinosis that's a technical
word and what it it seems to be the idea
that you're a low it's like you're a low
resolution representation of the
ultimate spirit that that encounters the
unknown it's something like that it's a
very smart idea and you could say maybe
that's what human beings have in common
is that that that we're each an
embodiment of that spirit for lack of a
better word so okay so then God makes
the god makes human beings male and
female makes them in his own image and
is happy about them and says well you're
going to dominate the world which you
know people like David Suzuki read that
to say you should go out and dominate
the world because they read that kind of
patriarchal oppression into the text but
this is more a description of how things
are going to be than whether or not they
should be that way so anyways that's the
sixth day and the seventh day
God rests right so that's the origin of
the week roughly speaking so okay that's
one story there's two creation stories
in Genesis and they actually don't match
completely in their structure and what
happened was someone they called the
redactor maybe it was a bunch of people
we don't know took creation Story one
and creation Story 2 from different
places and thought well these are sort
of the same and they're sort of
different and people are going to be
unhappy if we dispense with this one and
they're going to be unhappy if we
dispense this this one but they don't
make sense together so let's see if we
can put them in some kind of order that
makes approximate sense and they took
the newer one and put it second and took
the sorry they took the older one and
put it second and put took the newer one
and put it first so Adam and Eve is an
older story than the story that I just
told you so but it's a different story
it's written in a different style but
it's been more or less brought into
narrative coherence with the first story
so and you could say at the level of the
sentence there is paradoxes but at the
level of the chapter let's say the
stories make sense so okay so what
happens up there went from the earth a
mist and it watered the whole face of
the ground and the Lord God formed man
of the Dust of the ground and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life and
Man became a living Soul there's an
identity in this archaic sort of thought
between breath and spirit right
respiration Spirit inspiration Spirit
Numa like num atic Tire Spirit the
breath contains the spirit well why is
that well because when people die the
breath leaves their body and so it's an
easy thing to identify that with the
animating Spirit right anima means
Spirit as well so so that's the
phenomenological reality of the story
and Lord God planted a garden Eastward
in Eden and there he put the man whom he
had formed Eden means well-watered Place
well why well where do you want to live
these are desert people right who are
writing this well what do they want they
want an oasis what's an what's an oasis
it's a garden with water well you're
going to you're going to live somewhere
it's not going to be out in the middle
of the damn desert you want to be in a
garden that's watered and then you could
say you also be in a Walled Garden
that's protected and that's what
Paradise means paradesa means Walled
Garden so this initial Paradise is a
Walled Garden why walled order it's
culture nature what does it mean well
that's the natural environment of human
beings it's a it's the optimal balance
between culture and nature that's what a
Walled Garden is with enough water
flowing in it to keep it to keep it
fertile and that water is also chaos
right there has to be it it can't be
static and dry and solid and stale there
has to be some living element to it so
so it's a a walled place that the water
can still uh uh
fructify and out of the ground made the
Lord God to grow every tree that is
Pleasant to the sight so it's also full
of trees this is our natural habitat and
good for food the tree of life also in
the midst of the garden and the tree of
the knowledge of Good and Evil so these
are two trees they bring forth fruit
that produce something one produces the
knowledge of Good and Evil and the other
produces eternal life
so why well I'll get to that in a bit
and a river went out of Eden to water
the garden and from then it was parted
and became into four
heads we won't bother with that so now
God is having a little chat with Adam
and he says look you can eat every tree
of the garden except one of the tree of
the knowledge of Good and Evil you you
don't eat that because in the day you
eat you'll surely die so you might ask
well why is the tree put there to begin
with and well the answer to that is who
the hell knows that's how the story
portrays it we don't
know and the Lord God said it is not
good that the man should be alone I will
make a help meat for him and out of the
ground the Lord God formed every beast
of the field and every fowl of the air
and brought them unto Adam to see what
he would call them and whatsoever Adam
called every living creature that was
the name thereof so that's an echo of
the idea of the power of the word right
so even though these stories are from
different Traditions they're separate
Traditions you see at the beginning that
God uses his word to bring order out of
chaos and then he allows Adam in some
sense to do the same thing is that
there's this unarticulated plethora of
being and the man comes along and says
that's that that's that that's that and
that brings them into a higher order
form of being so it's a it's a
replication of the creation in a in a
shrunken
form and Adam gave names to all the
cattle cattle are just anything that has
four legs roughly speaking and to the
fowl of the air and every beast of the
field but for Adam there was not found a
help meat for him and the go Lord God
caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam
and he slept and he took one of his ribs
and closed up the flesh instead thereof
and the rib which the Lord God had taken
from man made he a woman and brought her
unto the man and Adam said this is now
bone of my bones and Flesh of My Flesh
she shall be called woman because she
was taken out of man and then there's an
injunction therefore a man shall leave
his father and his mother and shall
cleave unto his wife and they shall be
one flesh well there's also a there's a
moral injunction there and so the idea
is that the two beings that have been
created are actually not whole until
they're one thing right and once they're
joined together that's supposed to be
one thing and that one thing is actually
a more perfect entity than the two
things that are apart so and that's
actually part of the Sacred basis of the
idea of of of monogamous relationships
in in Western culture and they were both
naked the man and his wife and were not
ashamed a crucial piece of information
so what exactly does that
mean well the first question is what
does it mean to be
naked and so that's something that I
thought about a lot in relation and
there's a relationship there with
shame so the first question is what does
it mean to be naked and the second
question is what does it mean to be not
ashamed of that well there's an there's
a I would say there's an implication of
a kind of
unconsciousness So Adam and Eve exist in
this paradisal state but they they don't
they don't they don't have the capacity
for self-reflection there's no
self-consciousness here well why would I
say that because there's very little
difference between self-consciousness
and shame in fact if you do psychometric
analysis of the state of
self-consciousness it loads with
neuroticism so it loads with anxiety and
emotional pain so to become
self-conscious what does it mean to
become self-conscious it becomes it
means you become aware one way of
thinking about it is you become aware of
your vulnerability or another is that
you become aware of your insufficiency
okay so let's say that you're standing
up in front of a crowd talking and you
become self-conscious what happens well
first of all you can't talk anymore the
second is you kind of fall inside the
third is you feel ashamed and the fourth
is that you Retreat and you look down so
it's a low status uh operation and it's
associated with heightened anxiety and
so then you might say well why would you
become self-conscious before a crowd
well the answer is they can see you
right and they can judge you and you can
make an error in front of them and you
can make a fool of yourself so they put
you down the you can you can display
yourself in a manner that ratchets you
down the dominance hierarchy that's to
become self-conscious and so well at
least you have the advantage of being
covered up in front of the crowd but
let's say all of a sudden you're
stripped of your clothes so what's the
problem with that well all of your
insufficiencies let's say are on painful
display you can be evaluated by everyone
but even more importantly than that if
possible is that clothes actually
protect the most vulnerable parts of you
human beings are upright animals right
we're very strange animals you take a
cat or a dog they're basically armored
the part of them that you see their back
is heavily armored heavily protected
human being stretched upright and so the
softest part of parts of us are there
for display but also we're displayed as
sexual creatures too and so to become to
be naked and not ashamed of it is to
lack self-consciousness so the idea is
that the Adam and Eve in the original
state in the and lack
self-consciousness now the serpent was
more subtle subtle is an interesting
word here because it means kind of fog
likee and and vague and difficult to
detect so it's something that that lurks
and is hidden so that's what the serpent
is it's it's in the domain of hidden
things than any beast of the field which
the Lord God had made and the serpent
said unto the
woman hey hasn't God said you shouldn't
eat of every tree of the garden and the
woman said we may eat the fruit of the
Trees of the garden but of the fruit of
the tree which is in the middle of the
garden the central fruit God has said ye
shall not eat of it neither shall you
touch it lest you die and the serpent
said unto the woman you shall not surely
die for God knows that in the day you
eat thereof then your eyes will be
opened and you will be as Gods knowing
Good and Evil all right so there's
another implication there we already saw
that there's an imp there's the
implication that Adam and Eve are not
self conscious and now there's the
implication that their eyes aren't open
or at least that they're not they're not
open fully in some sense they're not
open for example to the knowledge of
Good and Evil and that seems to be
Associated somehow with death in some
strange way okay so and it's the serpent
talking to the woman so the serpent is
the is the tempter of the woman so the
question is why in the world would that
be I showed you those representations of
Mary right holding the infant up in the
air with her foot on the snake so you
think well who's more self-conscious
women or men and the answer to that is
women are more self-conscious than men
and even further you might say that
women taught men to be self-conscious
and I believe that to be the case maybe
babies taught women to be self-conscious
but women taught men to be
self-conscious and they still teach them
that all the time because there's
nothing that makes a man more
self-conscious than to be rejected by a
woman that he desires so the woman is
always offering self-consciousness to
men and it isn't necessarily A that they
exactly appreciate and that motif of
course runs through the Adam and Eve
story centrally because Eve is damned
forever in some sense for making Adam
self-conscious well he didn't want to be
self-conscious things were pretty good
when his eyes were closed and he was
wandering around not worrying about
whether he was naked or not well the
women became self-conscious why because
of snakes well maybe right maybe that's
exactly what happened you know so you
imagine we're being prayed upon for
millions of years by predatory reptiles
right and we become more and more alert
to threat and more and more alert to
threat and then one day we get so alert
to threat that we can see threat lurking
in the future and then all of a sudden
we become aware of the future and then
we become aware of death and then we're
really self-conscious but it's pretty
good if you want to keep the snakes down
which we've been doing quite
successfully ever since then but it's a
big price to pay we got so damn
sensitive to threat that we were finally
able to conceive the ultimate threat not
proximal threats but the fact of threat
itself and the fact of mortality itself
and the fact of finitude itself and
maybe women learned that because they
become painfully aware of the Mortal
limitations of their infants first right
this small thing could die could end and
it'll and certainly as an object of
predation and you can imagine God only
knows how many infants human beings lost
to Predators I mean I told you at one
point I believe that there was a a a a c
that was found that that had a that had
a that had a skull and Jaws that were
specialized for biting the skulls of
protohumans so one long tooth at the
back that would drive right through the
back of the skull so the cat could put
its teeth here and drive the tooth right
into the back of the skull so you know
that's a good enough Dragon for our for
our for our intense and purposes I would
say anyways the snake comes along and
opens the woman's eyes
when the woman saw that the tree was
good for food and that it was pleasant
to the eye and a treated to be desired
to make one wise she took of the fruit
thereof and did eat and gave also unto
her husband with her and he did eat and
the eyes of both of them were opened and
they knew that they were naked and they
sewed fig leaves together and made
themselves aprons well there's a lot
happening in those few lines now there's
a fruit thing going on there Snake and
fruit okay so we know from ly isbel
hypothetically that the reason that
primates like us develop our intense
vision is because we co-evolved with
snakes so the snakes opened her eyes
what about
fruit color
vision right why to detect ripe fruit we
know that and are women and ripe fruit
the same well they're the same in so far
as it was women offering the ripe fruit
and that's undoubtedly something that
happened you know the the hypothetical
idea is the males hunt and bring home
protein the women gather what are they
Gathering well they're gathering at at
minimum ripe fruit and then what are
they doing they're sharing it well you
also bring about a moral obligation when
you're sharing food right there's an
invitation to reciprocity there and so
the fact that women were sharing let's
say ripe fruit with men also brings them
into their what would you call builds up
the basis for the potential of a
reciprocal moral obligation it's
something like that and the problem
again for men with being allied with
women and infants is that it also
heightens the self-consciousness because
you're a lot tougher and more
indomitable say if there's just you but
as soon as you have a wife say and then
you also have an infant well all the
burden of their self-consciousness and
their vulnerability is placed upon you
well it's a hell of a bargain well why
did men accept the bargain well it's
partly because women stood in front of
them offering them fruit right well part
of the price that the men paid for that
was to wake the hell up well who the
hell wants that it's a lot more more
it's a lot more calming to remain asleep
with no knowledge of the sort of burden
of mortality that you would bear if you
became
self-conscious so fine so now they're
done with it they the snake and the
fruit woke them up and they can see and
the scales drop from their eyes and so
we can really see well so what does that
mean half our brain is visual is devoted
to visual processing so as well as long
as as our eyes got better our brain got
bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger
what happens when it gets big enough
well not only can you see you can meta
see it's you can start to see into the
future well that's exactly what happened
to us not only could we see with our
eyes we could see with our imagination
and our imagination is our you can see
with your eyes closed right close your
eyes bring up a vision you can imagine
the future well what are you seeing
you're seeing a potential future with
your eyes closed the circuitry is there
once it's developed you can use it to
imagine you can pro project your project
your vision into places that don't even
exist and you can start to conceptualize
the future what happens when you
conceptualize the future well this is a
I'm spoiling the punchline you have to
work because you can see the future
coming you think oh oh the future's
coming it isn't just the present anymore
I don't have to just worry about whether
or not I'm hungry right now I'm going to
have to worry about whether I'm hungry
tomorrow and next week and next month
and next year and for me and for my wife
and for my child and and for the
community it's like you can forget about
your day-to-day existence in Paradise at
that point there's no evidence that
people in industrialized societies are
happier than people in
non-industrialized Societies in fact
quite the contrary we're less happy why
well because we fully and constantly
bear the burden of the future well
that's good because we don't die and we
live maybe 30 years longer and we have
fewer horrible diseases and all of that
but that doesn't mean it's any picnic
you have to carry that along with you
wherever you go that's the burden of
self-consciousness right and that's
exactly what happens when God finds out
that Adam and Eve have become
self-conscious the one of the first
things he says is jigs up now man you're
going to be working forever toiling
forever it's your destiny there's no
escaping from it well human beings work
what does that mean they sacrifice the
present for the future and that's partly
as soon as this happens like the next
story which is Cain and Abel you see the
motif of sacrifice emerge right that's
story circulates around the motif of
sacrifice sacrifice the present for the
future well what's the price you pay you
don't get the present that's a big price
right because what you do is what you're
doing essentially is you're taking all
the potential suffering of the future
and putting it into the present all the
time well so what happens well maybe you
live longer and you live healthier but
you're not without the burden that that
puts on you so the eyes of them were
both
opened and they knew they were naked
well so what does that mean well what
does naked mean it means You Know You're
vulnerable that's exactly what it means
they know they're vulnerable so they sew
fig leaves together and make themselves
aprons so what happens
is they wake up their eyes open they
know they're vulnerable so they discover
the future they discover their
vulnerability extended into the future
and the first thing they do is build
culture right that's the Fig leaves it's
like okay here's the vulnerability we
put a barrier between us and the world
it's like a wall
right because this is externalized
clothing that's one way of thinking
about it and so to put that clothing on
this is clothing is a human Universal by
the way now sometimes it's only used for
decorative purposes but far more often
especially in cold climates it's used
for protection so to clothe yourself is
to recognize your vulnerability and to
use culture to hold it at Bay so fine
they make themselves aprons and they
heard the voice of the Lord God walking
in the garden in the cool of the
day and Adam and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of the Lord God Among
the Trees of the garden okay so before
Adam and Eve wake up before they realize
they're vulnerable they don't hide from
God so what does that mean
well he's the spirit that goes into the
unknown to to to to conquer it and to
make the world okay so let's say that's
what you're supposed to do you're
supposed to mediate between Chaos and
Order okay okay and you're supposed to
do that forthrightly so then the
question is what the hell's stopping you
and that answer is easy your knowledge
of your vulnerability obviously that's
what's stopping you it's like why aren't
you courageous and forthright well
because you can be cut off at the knees
and terribly hurt and so you're going to
shrink back from that responsibility and
it's no bloody Wonder right it's it's
it's obviously what's going to happen
so the Lord God calls unto Adam so he's
trying to what that means to for the for
God to call on you is to say for God to
say I'm I want to act through you or I
want to act with you that Spirit let's
say well Adam says I heard I heard God
says to Adam where are you and and Adam
says I heard your voice in The Garden
right I heard the call but I was afraid
because I was naked and I hid myself
it's like yes that's exactly what human
beings are like that's precisely exactly
what we're like
we hear the call but we hide and we have
the thing is it's there's good reason
for it it's not something
trivial and God said who told you you
were naked did you eat the tree that I
told you shouldn't eat and the man says
the man doesn't come off very well in
this particular phrase as far as I'm
concerned and there's actually quite
this is actually quite a comedic story
except that it's also a catastrophic
tragedy it's like God calls Adam
out like what's with you now you know
you're hiding from me why and the first
thing Adam does is says it's her fault
it's her fault she made me
self-conscious well I see that in
resentful men all the time they're very
antipathetic towards women and they
blame their misery and resentment on the
fact that women won't have anything to
do with them while the women are making
them self conscious for not being all
they should be because the women think
why should I bother with you if you're
not the embodiment of the spirit that
will move into the unknown and and face
the Leviathan which is exactly what she
should be saying and you're well I don't
want to have anything to do with that
but I'd like women to like me anyways
it's like well good luck with that so
that doesn't work out and so instead of
getting your act together you say those
godamn women that's exactly what Adam
says to God he said well don't don't be
laying this on my feet it's the woman
you made her she made me all
self-conscious and cowardly it's like
brilliant great wonderful and God says
to the woman what did you do and the
woman said well it was it was the
serpent that that that confused me and
and I ate well like actually I'm a
little more sympathetic to her than to
Adam All Things Considered because after
all she was trying to deal with the damn
snake right and we find out that the
snake is not only the thing that prays
upon her infants but as the tradition
developed it's identified with Satan
himself so and that's the snake in every
soul that's the right way of thinking
about that so she had her reasons but
doesn't
matter you pay whether you have your
reasons or not and so God says to the
serpent because you've done this you're
cursed above all cattle and above every
beast of the field upon the belly shalt
thou go and dust shalt thou eat all the
days of thy life so first of all the
serpent seems to have legs right and
then it's turned into a snake and that's
actually how it worked by the way
because snakes had legs and they lost
them now you know I'm not trying to say
that this story necessarily represents
that but it's an interesting
parallel and he tells the snake all put
enmity between thee and the woman and
between thy seed and her seed it shall
bruise thy head and thou shall bruise
his heel well yes well that's the snakes
striking right and the fact that when
human beings see snakes they want to
just like The Simpsons whacking day
right it's time to get rid of the snakes
and that's why the many great Saints are
those who drive the snakes from the land
like St Patrick or St George in the
dragon and it's the same representation
of the hero moving out into the
Wilderness and confronting the predatory
the predatory U uh predatory potential
is the right way of thinking about
it all right unto the woman he said I
will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception in sorrow Thou shalt bring
forth children and thy desire to be
shall be to thy husband and he shall
rule over thee well that's a statement
of Destiny not a statement of the way it
should be so what does it
mean I will greatly multiply thy sorrow
and thy conception well
self-consciousness will do that because
of course women are fully aware of
exactly how fragile their infants are so
that's a big problem in sorrow Thou
shalt sh bring forth children that's
something particular to human women
right and here's why the price we paid
for the rapid expansion of our brain
which is also something that gave us
this self-consciousness and vision meant
that there's an evolutionary arms race
between the pelvic width of women and
the hole in the center of the pelvis and
the infant's head so what happens is the
infant is born far too young for a
mammal of our size because if it was any
older the head would be too big the
pelvis would have to be too wide its
structural stability would be
compromised and then women couldn't run
so right now women are at the maximum
for hip width in terms of their ability
to run so what's happened is that
infants have had to be born younger with
a compressible head so you know the
bones of an infant skull aren't joined
together and sometimes after babies are
born their head is actually almost
cone-shaped because of the tremendous
pressure that was exerted on their head
during the during the birthing process
and of course that's killed innumerable
women
right I mean women's life expectancy
before what the latter half of the 20th
century was way below men because they
died in child birth all the time and why
well it's a it's a
very what do you call that it's a it's
um it's a very narrow Gateway and the
price that women pay for it is very high
risk of death very high risk of Sorrow
because of of death of children and in
child birth and also extraordinar
extraordinary pain in giving birth so
that's the price women pay for having
vision and being
self-conscious well that's and then
worse they they desire their husband and
he'll rule over them well whether or not
that's good or bad it doesn't matter
God's statement is that's how it's going
to be well partly that's because as far
as I can tell there isn't really women
roughly speaking there's women with
infants and a woman with an infant is
compromised in terms of her
what independent individuality to a
remarkable degree because the infant is
dependent absolutely dependent
absolutely dependent for a year and then
unbelievably dependent for like 8 years
after that and then still pretty
dependent for another five so once you
have an infant it's no longer you and
I've talked to lots of women for whom
that was a great Relief by the way
because it actually is somewhat of a
relief to now not be the center of
everything you know if you go visit your
in-laws for example and you have a baby
it's like they pay attention to the baby
your parents will do the same thing it's
kind of nice to have that happen but
it's still an absolute catastrophe for
you as an independent being you you're
not going to go out in the forest and
hunt down dragons when you have an
infant so even if you could do it you're
not going to do it and so that's
basically what that statement outlines
and then to adamy says because you
listened to your wife and ate of that
tree which I said you know maybe that's
not such a good idea cursed is is the
ground for thy sake in sorrow shal thou
eat of it all the days of th life of thy
life Thorns also and thisel shall it
bring forth to thee and thou shalt eat
the herb of the field in the sweat of
thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou
return into the ground that's the Death
part for out of it was thou taken for
dust Thou Art and unto dust Thou shalt
thou return and I missed one thing about
that when the serpent this took me a
long time to figure out I think I've
mentioned it already but it's worth
reviewing the serpent tells
Eve that if she eats from the fruit of
the tree then her eyes will be open and
she'll be as Gods knowing good and evil
well the serpent doesn't say well you'll
be as as gods in so far as knowing good
and evil but you'll die so you only get
half the gift and so then I thought well
there's this weird intermingling of of
occurrences in the story there's the
development of vision there's the
development of self Consciousness
there's the knowledge of nakedness
there's the emergence of work there's
the emergence of pain and suffering and
childbirth and there's knowledge of Good
and Evil I thought for ages I thought
what the hell what the hell what's going
on there why is there an emphasis on
moral knowledge what does this have to
do with moral knowledge and the
implication is that in the initial state
of unconsciousness there was no moral
knowledge and I think of that as an
animal like state right there's no moral
knowledge in animals you don't think
well that evil cat you don't ever think
that even if it's acting like a predator
even if it's playing with its prey you
don't attribute moral knowledge to the
cat because you say well it doesn't know
what it's doing it doesn't understand
what it's doing which is to say it acts
it out but it can't represent it or
maybe even more it acts it out but it
can't represent it and it certainly
can't analyze its representation it
doesn't have that level of capacity but
we do so there's that's associated with
moral knowledge to some degree why
knowledge of Good and Evil I thought all
right here's what it is let's think
about what you would consider
reprehensible universally you could say
how's this torturing an infant I would
consider that virtually universally
reprehensible wouldn't you say okay so
we we'll accept that as a reasonable
definition so then the question is one
why would you do it we'll leave that
aside for a moment two how do you know
how to do
it that's the issue and that's easy Once
I know how I can be hurt
because I'm aware of my own
vulnerability I know how you can be hurt
and I can make it into a game and I can
prolong it forever and I can do it the
worst possible way and that's why when
you open your eyes and you know your
vulnerability in your nakedness that you
immediately have the knowledge of Good
and Evil and so then evil becomes
something like well there's tragedy in
life fine earthquakes cancer disease all
those terrible things that's different
than me deciding that I'm going to to
make you miserable the one is well
you're a limited creature in an
unlimited World you're going to get hurt
because of that and maybe there's ways
that you can be that will enable you to
transcend that at least to some degree
and still have the benefits of being
that's entirely different than me
deciding that things are going to go a
lot worse for you than they might and
human beings are capable I don't know if
you've ever gone to some of the dungeon
torture dungeons in Europe boy those are
fun places to go you think you take the
most malevolent person you Poss Poss
could then have a little Convention of
those people and then get them to think
up the worst possible things that they
could possibly devise and then you have
the instruments of torture that in a in
a medieval torture dungeon right it's an
art form and you think well why do
people why are people willing to inflict
that on one another well we'll talk
about that next time when we talk about
the story of Cain and Abel because I
think it holds the secret to that and in
the meantime I'll stop with this story
but I want to tell you the story of the
Buddha because it onto it very nicely so
what do you have you have you have a
protected space there's unconscious
beings in a protected space something
comes in in the form of the serpent to
reveal death Mo to to reveal
vulnerability and death right and then
the paradise comes to an end the human
beings are eliminated from it and they
don't get to come back so God puts
angels with flaming swords at the at the
at the Gateway To Paradise so that
people cannot come back in it isn't OB
obvious what that means except that
there's got to be some sort of trial by
fire before re-entering Paradise but we
can leave that alone for a moment so
that's the basic structure of the story
unconscious human beings emergence of
knowledge uh realization of death and
suffering and the elimination of the
paradise right okay so now I'll read you
the story of the
Buddha the father of Prince Gama the
Buddha savior of the Orient determined
to protect his son from Desperate
knowledge and tragic awareness built for
him in enclosed Pavilion a Walled Garden
of Earthly Delights okay so the The
Story Goes that an angel visited
Buddha's father and said that he's going
to have a son and the son is either
going to become the greatest ruler that
the world has ever seen or a spiritual
leader and the father being a practical
man thought well there's no bloody way I
want my son to be some like wandering
spiritual leader I want him to be the
greatest King that the world has ever
seen okay and so um the father
decides how am I going to get my son to
be the greatest ruler the world has ever
seen I better get him to fall in love
with the world because then he's not
going to go traing after some sort of
half-witted spiritual knowledge he's
going to stick to practical tasks right
that's something that a father should do
to some degree is Orient you in the
world right and maybe you shouldn't
subvert your your Spiritual Development
to any great degree but there's a
practical element to this and and so
anyways that's how it works and so
that's what happens the the the father
builds this city of perfection and he
eliminates from it everything that's re
a reminder of the suffering that's
associated with life so the only thing
that's allowed the only creatures that
are allowed to be in there the only
people that are allowed to be in there
are healthy young and happy people so
the Buddha grows up surrounded by
nothing but the positive Elements of
Life well you think well what does that
mean well it's akin to the paradise idea
obviously walled enclosure of paradise
where there's no death but there's more
to it than that too it's also in some
sense what a good father would do what
do you do with your young children well
you don't expose them to death and Decay
at every step of the way right you you
build a protected world for them like a
walled enclosure and you only keep
what's healthy in lifegiving inside of
it and you don't expose them to things
that they can't tolerate you know maybe
you don't take a three-year-old to a
funeral now maybe you do but maybe you
don't there's things that you don't
expect them to be able to cope with you
regulate what they're allowed to watch
you're not going to show them the te
Texas Chainsaw Massacre when they're 4
years old right so so you're staving off
knowledge of mortality and death and so
he's just being a good father in many
ways here all signs of Decay and
degeneration were thus kept hidden from
the prince immersed in the immediate
pleasures of the senses in physical love
in dance and music and beauty and
pleasure gotama grew to maturity
protected absolutely from the
limitations of mortal being however he
grew curious despite his father's most
particular attention and will and
resolve to leave his seductive prison
well it's that Curiosity element it's
the same thing that lurks in the Adam
and Eve story it's like God tells Adam
and Eve see that tree over there don't
be bothering with it well you know
what's going to happen with human beings
especially if there's a snake associated
with it they're going to be over there
right away checking that place out and
that's exactly what happens with the
Buddha it's like he's raised to be
healthy and what is what's the
consequence of that is that the fact
that he's healthy makes him look for
what's beyond the protected confines of
the thing that made him healthy it's
like it's like even in the jepetto story
you know where jepetto paints on
Pinocchio's mouth and he's ready to go
he puts him outside the next day and
pinoc is ready to run away with all the
kids right so the consequence of raising
a child in a healthy way is that the
child is going to be curious enough to
go out there and look for some trouble
and we actually know that because there
is follow-up studies of teenagers you
imagine that there's teenagers who never
break any rules and then there's
teenagers who break all the rules okay
these teenagers don't do very well
introverted depressed anxious depressed
sorry I said that twice these ones are
antisocial the ones in the middle that's
what you want you want your damn
teenager to get out of the paradisal
confines of your house and to go cause
some trouble and to investigate maybe
you don't want to know about it anymore
than you have to you don't want them to
be breaking rules all the time and you
don't want them to be so timid and
oppressed that they can't make a move on
their own and never make a mistake so
the the paradoxical thing here and it
sort of echoed this is why I like these
two stories back to back it's like if
you give people what they want then the
first thing they're going to do is try
to get Beyond it and doeski says the
same thing in Notes from Underground he
says if you gave people everything they
wanted pure Utopia so he says so that
they're they're sitting in a pool of
bliss with nothing but bubbles of
Happiness coming up from the surface and
all they have to do eat cake and busy
themselves with the continuation of the
species dos dov's observation is the
first thing that people would do is find
something to smash that with just so
that something interesting and perverse
could happen it's like well yes we're
we're creatures that are designed to
encounter the unknown we want to keep
moving beyond what we have even if we
have what we have is what we want and
maybe that's partly because we're
oriented towards the future we think
well this is great but it's not good
enough it's it's great but it's not good
enough there's always something more
that drives us forward well so that's
what happens with the Buddha he gets
curious he sees the walls he thinks
there's walls there's probably something
outside of those walls so then he goes
to his
father and he
says I'm I want to go outside what's
outside and his father says Nah you
don't want to go outside and Buddha says
yeah well I really do want to go outside
and his father knows that unless he lets
him go outside he's going to climb over
the walls and so the father
decides he's going to let him go outside
but he's going to fix everything out
there first so he goes outside it's like
the Chinese preparing for the Olympics
you know when they sprayed the grass
with with with green paint got rid of
all the homeless people it's the same
thing so he goes outside the city and he
tells everyone all right old people sick
people dying people hit the road we
don't want to see you for a while clean
all this out we want the Attractive
people around the sides of the roads
like waving Palm FRS and all of that and
so when my son comes out he's going to
see nothing but what's good and so he
gets that all arranged and he lets his
son go outside now his son goes outside
in this little Chariot thing and he has
a uh someone with him now unbeknownst to
his father that person that's with him
is an emissary of the Gods and so in a
perverse way he plays the same role as
the serpent in the story of of of Adam
and Eve and the gods have already
arranged so that the father's uh car is
going to be insufficient and it's the
snake in the garden idea it's like no
matter how much care you take to make
things perfect some of the some of what
what you're excluding is going to come
back in So
anyways Buddha goes outside and and he's
in his Chariot and preparations were
made to gild his chosen route to cover
the adventurer's path with flowers and
to display for his admiration and
preoccupation the fairest women of the
Kingdom the prince set out with full
retinue in the shielded comfort of a
chaperon Chariot and delighted in the
Panorama previously prepared for him the
gods however decided to disrupt these
most carefully laid plans and sent an
aged man to hobble in full view
alongside the road the prince's
fascinated gaze fell upon the ancient
interloper compelled by curiosity he
asked his attendant what is that
creature stumbling shabby bent and
broken beside my retinue and the
attendant answered that is a man like
other men who was born an infant became
a child a youth a husband a father a
father of fathers he has become old
subject to destruction of his Beauty his
will and the possibilities of life like
other men you say hesitantly inquired
the prince that means this will happen
to me and the attendant answered
inevitably with the passage of time well
that's the end of that party the world
collapses in on Buddha and bang he high
tailes at home well what does that mean
well that's what children do roughly
speaking as they're around their mother
they're they've got security there they
go out into the unknown they encounter
something that's just just a little bit
too much for them bang they come home
they get all padded back into shape and
hugged and taken care of hugging
children and patting them is actually
analgesic it actually reduces pain
unsurprisingly that's what you do with
someone who's grieving right so you hug
them because grief is pain so so they
you know you Pat them they get rid of
their pain they get rid of their anxiety
you calm them down and what happens well
the next day they want to go out again
well that's exactly what happens to the
Buddha so he's all shorted out by his
encounter with death which is very
little different than what happens to
Adam and Eve runs
back recovers for 6 months he has
post-traumatic stress disorder he runs
home and he recovers for six months
right in time his anxiety lessened his
curiosity grew and he ventured outside
again this time the God sent a sick man
into view this creature he asked his
attendant shaking and palsied horribly
Afflicted unbearable to Behold a source
of pity and contempt what is he and the
attendant answered that's a man like
other
men who was born whole but who became
ill and sick unable to cope a burden to
himself and others suffering and
incurable like other men you say
inquired the prince this could happen to
me and the attendant answers no man is
exempt from the ravages of
disease once again the world collapsed
and gotam returned to his
home but the Delights of his previous
life were ashes in his mouth and he
ventured forth a third time the God in
their Mercy sent him a dead man in
funeral procession this creature he
asked his attendant laying so still
appearing so fearsome surrounded by
grief and by sorrow lost and forlorn
what is he and the attendant answered
that is a man like other men born of
woman beloved and hated who was once you
who once was you and now is the earth
like other men you say inquired the
prince then this could happen to me this
is your end said the attendant and the
end of all men well that's the end of
childhood right there's no going back
after that it's like Pinocchio he goes
back there's no one home anymore it's
there's nothing that your father can do
to protect you from knowledge of death
there's no returning to the childhood
unconsciousness because you're you now
know and there's no going backwards
suicide that's going backwards that's
how you replace your emergent
self-consciousness with the old Blissful
unconsciousness and that's exactly what
suicidal people wish
they're going to destroy their painful
self-consciousness and make it all go
away the world collapsed a final time
and gotama asked to be returned home but
the attendant had orders from the
prince's father and took him instead to
a festival of women occuring near
occurring nearby in a Grove in the woods
the prince was met by a beautiful
assemblage who offered themselves freely
to him without restraint in song dance
and play in the spirit of sensual love
but gotama could think only of death and
the inevitable decomposition of beauty
and took no pleasure in the
display well so you see the parallels
between one story and the other they're
the same they have the same underlying
structure initial Paradise partly
childhood partly unconsciousness the
emergence of knowledge of mortality into
that and the demolition of the of the
paradise this the same meta story that
we've been talking about all along
ordered State collapse into chaos well
the the rest of the story is the return
like and the Bible Bible's actually set
up that way it's collapse into history
and then a movement upward the question
is what's the movement upward that's the
question here when the collapse is
caused by knowledge of mortality and
selfcon and the emergence of
self-consciousness and knowledge of
death is there any manner in which
Redemption can be attained or is that
the final like is that finally is that
does that finally demolish you well
that's the question and that's that's
that's it's the answer to that question
that entire civilizations constantly
pursue and the question is well what is
the answer and part of the answer is
identification with the spirit that
generates order out of chaos that's the
answer it's something like that and so
then the question is what does that mean
well that'll be what the last two
lectures in the course are about because
we're down to two last lectures so any
questions does it make
sense more more importantly really is
there is there any way in which it
doesn't make sense because these stories
are not supposed to make sense right
that's the theory is that they're
archaic superstitions or something like
that well it doesn't seem to me that
that's the case it seems to me that they
make insanely perfect sense they're
exactly right they tell you exactly what
human beings are like and exactly what
the situation that we face
is so and so then the question is well
the diagnosis is made properly what it
has the Cure been properly identified
well that's what we'll discuss for the
next two
sessions